9

1.7 MENTAL HEALTH
Climate change affects mental health due to changes in the prevalence and severity of 
natural disasters on human settlements. These events can cause anxiety-related responses 
and later potentially lead to chronic and severe mental health disorders, with implications 
for mental health systems and supports (27). These effects will fall disproportionately on 
individuals who are already vulnerable, especially for Indigenous people and those living 
in low-resource settings (30). Additionally, individuals might feel a distressing sense of  
loss that people experience when their land is damaged and they lose amenities and 
opportunity (31). The mental health effects of these losses are becoming evident in many 
Indigenous communities where connectivity to the land is integral to psychological, physical 
and cultural wellbeing. Changing climatic conditions are causing a variety of changes to 
the land, sea and snow environments, which are impacting the security of spirituality, food, 
travel and culture (14). Elevated levels of anxiety, depression, and post-traumatic stress 
disorders have been reported in populations who have experienced flooding and during 
slow-developing events such as prolonged droughts; impacts include chronic distress and 
increased incidence of suicide (32,33). Even in high-income regions where the humanitarian 
crisis might be less, the impact on the local economy, damaged homes, and economic losses 
can persist for years after natural disasters (34). Government and agencies now emphasise 
psychological and psychosocial interventions within disaster response and emergency 
management. Social adaptation processes can mediate public risk perceptions and 
understanding, psychological and social impacts, coping responses, and behavioural 
adaptation (35).

SCIENCE NARRATIVE I CLIMATE CHANGE IMPACTS ON THE HEALTH OF CANADIANS
